Int. 3. Man-Machine Studies (1974) 6, 261-276

Student Models in Computer-aided Instruction
JOHN A. SnLF

Centre for Computer Studies, University of Leeds, Leeds, U.K.
(Received 15 November 1973)
In order to individualize instruction, a computer-aided instruction (CAD program
must maintain a "student model", i.e. a representation of the hypothesized
knowledge state of the student. We propose a student model consisting of a set
of programs to represent the student's knowledge state. Teaching proceeds after
a comparative evaluation of student and teachex programs, and learning is represented by direct modification of the student model. The advantages of an explicit
procedural model are illustrated by considering a program which maintains
such a model. Theoretical and practical difficulties facing such an approach
are also discussed.

Introduction
The raison d'etre of computer-aided instruction (CAI) is often said to be its
ability to provide individualized teaching, i.e. to evaluate a teaching function
one o f whose arguments is a representation of the student. The knowledge
determining a teaching program's overall performance can be classified
under three headings:
(a) knowledge of how to teach (which includes knowledge of students in
general);
(b) knowledge of what is being taught;
(c) knowledge of who is being taught (i.e. knowledge of one student in
particular).
Of these, only type (c) knowledge is specifically relevant to the aim of "individualization". This knowledge will be called the "student model".
Since the term "student model" has been used rather freely in the CAI
literature, it is to be emphasized that the "model" should serve its customary
purpose; to an observer O, an object Ms is a model of an object S to the
extent that O can use Ms to answer questions about S. I f we identify S as
our student and let O pose the question "What is the current knowledge
state of S?", then we have a means of evaluating an Ms (a student model);
that is to what extent does the Ms enable a human teacher or the teaching
program itself (which are two possible Os) to determine how much S knows
at any time ?
261

262

J.A. SELF

The aims of this article are (1) to argue that CAI programs could develop
a more natural representation of the teaching/learning process by maintaining
a student model composed of a set of programs representing the student's
hypothesized knowledge state, and (2) to illustrate the technique, and to
clarify advantages and disadvantages of the approach, by considering an
implementation of such a teaching program.
A Survey of Student Models

In considering computational formalizations of student models, it is
necessary to distinguish carefully between type (b) and type (c) knowledge
(referring to the above classification). The former is independent of the latter
(and may therefore be considered constant over all teaching sessions), but not
necessarily vice versa. In fact, a subset of type (c) knowledge should indicate
the type (b) knowledge assimilated. For this reason, it will be necessary to
consider representations of type (b) knowledge later.
The Mss of most existing CAI programs are similar to those provided by
author language systems. In these, the student receives individualized instruction to the extent that the program may branch to different nodes in a
prespecified teaching sequence, depending on the response matched and
on the values of a set of changeable registers. Since it is only the latter which
is carried from node to node, it is this, the set of registers, which constitutes
the Ms. The implication is that a program path may be found, as a function
of register contents, such that a threshold level of understanding is attained
and that the registers enable such levels to be measured.
The most obvious deficiency of author language systems--the need for a
laborious prespecification and refinement of display text and anticipated
responses--leads naturally to generative systems, in which problems and
comments are not prestored but generated dynamically. Clearly, this generation should be a function of an Ms. However, particular Mss found in
practical generative systems are not significant improvements on those found
in author language systems. For example, Peplinski (1970) simply records
the number of questions and the number of correct answers, and this record
is used to determine when to generate more dit~icult questions. Thus, the M,
is a set of just two changeable registers. Similarly, in Taylor's system (Taylor,
1968), "the programmer can set any number of indices for the machine to
keep track of" and the calling of scripts (but not the execution of them)
can depend on some pre-determined profile of indices. And Siklossy's
discussion of his program to teach set theory (Siklossy, 1971) contains no
mention of type (c) knowledge.

STUDENT MODELS IN CAI

263

Generative CAI programs can be divided into two classes: those in which
the type (b) knowledge is implicit, and those in which it is explicit. Only in
the latter case can type (c) knowledge refer directly to type (b) knowledge.
Most generative CAI programs belong in the former category. For example,
Peplinski embeds type (b) knowledge in the ALGOL60 procedures which solve
the problems generated. Siklossy expresses type (b) knowledge as LISt,
functions, which makes them available as data, under interpretation, although, with one exception mentioned later, he does not propose to make
use of this.
In generative programs of the latter category, we have, in theory, the
advantage that the Ms could represent the student's knowledge state by
referring directly to the type (b) knowledge to indicate that which has been
learnt. In practice, Mss have been rather simpler.
In Carbonell's system (CarboneU, 1970), in which type (b) knowledge is
expressed as a "semantic network" (about which there will be more later),
there appears to be only one element of the total knowledge which belongs
in type (c). This is his "temporary tags" which are inserted at strategic points
in the semantic network to indicate (1) whether a particular node of the
network has been asked, and, if so, whether answered correctly or not,
and (2) how far into the network a system answer to a question of the form
"tell me about . . ." has reached. Wexler (1970) also inserts tags into a
semantic network to indicate whether an item has been asked or presented
to the student. His system also maintains a set of registers, as in author
language systems, which "may be used to decide between alternatives in a
complex remedial strategy devised by a teacher", although, as is often the
case, there are a host of arbitrary conventions and restrictions which make
such an analysis difficult. Brown, Burton & Zdybel (1972) represent part
of the type (b) knowledge as a semantic network, but make no use of "tags"
as above. Instead, they maintain a student model (called an "external state
vector") consisting of a set of flags (or registers) which are altered in accordance with the kind of material the student is currently exploring. These flags
do not refer to type (b) knowledge, but are intended to indicate the presuppositions behind student questions. Each flag can take one of a prespecified
small number of values.
To summarize then, most CAI systems maintain an Ms consisting of a
set of registers, the contents of which are interpreted by type (a) knowledge,
plus tags relating to explicit type (b) knowledge, if this exists. Since such
programs have changeable registers and can transfer control depending on
the state of these registers, they have the power of Turing machines and
can therefore conduct any type of teaching dialogue which could be produced

264

J.A. SELF

by any machine. Any difficulty is a practical rather than theoretical one.
Any advantages of an alternative Ms lie in the way in which it gives a natural
and understandable representation of the teaching/learning process, and
facilitates the implementation of effective teaching programs. CAI should
aim not only to improve the efficiency of educational processes, but to work
out models of the processes themselves.

A Procedural Student Model
The designer of a CAI program is concerned to define behavioural objectives, if only to provide a means of evaluation. The attainment of such
objectives is determined by asking questions. Answering a question seems
to involve evaluating a program, subroutines of which may be processes of
information retrieval, calculation, hypothesis formation and evaluation,
and problem subdivision. The natural way to represent one component of
type (c) knowledge, therefore, is as a set of programs--the answers predicted
by this set of programs should agree with those of the student. As the student
learns, so his Ms should change (by modification of the set of programs),
perhaps towards a set of corresponding programs expressing type (b)
knowledge.
The need to relate type (c) knowledge more closely to type (b) knowledge
is foreseen by both Carbonell and Wexler. CarboneU proposes that "a
student's input-output behaviour can be accounted for by introducing
small perturbations in the semantic network". Similarly, Wexler considers
that erasures from the network "might be used in a dynamic model of a
student's presumed knowledge." Neither proposal reached the top of the
stack of priorities. However, two comments are in order: first, these
changes are presumably to be made to a copy of the network rather
than to the network itself (else the program will begin making the
same errors as the student), and secondly, it is assumed that the organization
of knowledge termed a "semantic network" can be usefully compared to
that which is to be learned by the student.
Thus, our concern with type (c) knowledge involves a consideration of
type (b) knowledge.

Knowledge Systems
In CAI, one seeks descriptive, rather than normative, knowledge representations, in order that the program's problem-solving processes should be
comparable with those of a student.

STUDENT MODELS IN CAI

265

The apparent division of CAI type (b) knowledge into programs [Peplinski
(1970), Siktossy (1971)] and data [semantic networks--Wexler (1970),
Carbonell (1970), Brown et al. (1972)] is an illusion. To say that knowledge
is organized as a network is to say only that items of knowledge are interrelated--the important questions are concerned with how that network is
interpreted. That this interpretation is not obvious is evidenced by the fact
that the three CAI systems built round semantic networks have different
interpretation mechanisms. Carbonell's network is interpreted in the standard
Quillian way (Quillian, 1969), using its superpart-superconcept organization
to permit processing and deduction. In Wexler's case, the teacher is required
to define specific derivational processes (with the intended advantage that
these processes are available for purposes of expository and remedial instruction). Brown et al. (1972)" compromise by providing some specialized
routines to perform a limited class of inferences, which the user may expand
by adjoining new inferencing procedures to the executive which processes
the network.
As we are seeking descriptive representations, we must consider the
experimental evidence which is invariably quoted (Collins and Quillian,
1969) as indicating that knowledge is in fact organized as a "semantic
network". These experiments confirmed that retrieval times were proportional
to the number of levels separating nodes (although results indicated that
the processes of retrieving a property at a node and moving up a level are
parallel ones, unlike the computer realizations), but utterly failed to explain
response times when the information presented is contradicted by or absent
from the network. Since a student will often have incorrect or inadequate
information, this is a result which can hardly be ignored. The questionanswering process is considerably more complicated (Norman, 1972) than
the simple information retrieval process encouraged by semantic networks.
There are clearly many open questions concerning a human's information
processing methods.
That not all type (b) knowledge can be conveniently encoded as a semantic
network is recognized in the system of Brown et al. (1972) which, in order to
answer questions concerning causal relationships between events, has part
of its type (b) knowledge represented as a set of augmented finite-state
automata. Question-answering is then accomplished by running the global
automaton and recording all possible global state changes. This trace of
the program's execution provides the means to answer questions concerning
causal chains of events and transitions, and the reasons for them..
This progression from "network" to "program" representation of type (b)
knowledge is paralleled by recent trends in the field of artificial intelligence.

266

J.A. SELF

Here, an alternative to network approaches was devised in which type (b)
knowledge was represented as axioms in a formal logical system, usually
first-order predicate logic. Since an equivalence can be established between
semantic networks and predicate logic, the advantages of the latter lie
essentially in the fact that expressions in predicate logic have a standard
interpretation. Apart from a proposal by Coles (1969), methods derived
from formal logic and theorem-proving have had no impact on CAI. The
axiomatic representation of knowledge does not provide a descriptive model
nor an adequate normative one, since uniform proof procedures are inherently inefficient. These criticisms have led to the "procedural embedding of
knowledge" thesis (Hewitt, 1972), which holds that intellectual structures
should be analysed through their procedural analogues. In practice (Sussman,
Winograd & Charniak, 1972; Sussman & McDermott, 1972), this means
that the declarative axioms of formal logic are written as imperative procedures in a general goal-oriented language interpreted by a multiprocessing
control structure with respect to the current state of knowledge of the system.
These procedures may well contain explicit strategic information to control
searches. The difficulties experienced with earlier attempts to represent
knowledge by programs (i.e. that interactions between programs soon become
unmanageable) are mitigated by having procedures automatically invoked
when certain events occur, rather than called explicitly. Such attempts to
design programming languages which formalize directly the foundations
of problem-solving, and which require solutions to be expressed in terms of
actions and purposes, encourage the view that it is becoming possible to
express a student model in terms of computational processes which (it is
hypothesized) that the student has conceptualized.

An Implementation
This section will discuss the implementation of a teaching program which
maintains a "student model" intended to provide a more transparent answer
to the paradigm question of the introduction, i.e. "What is the current
knowledge state of the student ?"
In order to provide a context, we will consider the dialogue of Fig. 1.*
In general terms, we see that the teacher is trying to teach the student not
particular items of information, but the relations between these items and
how to establish such relations.
* This dialogueis a slightlymodifiedversionof one originallydiscussedby R. C. Anderson,
University of Illinois, while Fulbright-HayesFellow at the Computer Based Learning
Project, Universityof Leeds, during a seminar entitled "The structure and functionof ~t
Socratic teacher".

STUDENT MODELS IN CAI

267

1. Teacher: Which is likely to be colder, Newfoundland or Montana?
2. Student: Newfoundland.
3.
Please give your reasons for answering Newfoundland.
Newfoundland is further north.
4.
Yes, that's true. Are you arguing then, that if you take any two
5.
places in the Northem Hemisphere, the one which is further north
will have the lower average temperature?
Yes, I guess so.
6.
I'll tell you now that Montana has lower average temperatures than
7.
Newfoundland. Does this fact cause you to change your reasoning?
Yes.
8.
In what way ?
9.
Being further north isn't as important as 1 thought.
10.
Please try to be more precise. Would you, for instance, say that if
11.
you take any two places in the Northern Hemisphere, the one furthest
south has the colder temperature?
No, I wouldn't say that.
12.
Would you say that how far north a place is has no effect on tem13.
perature ?
No, I know it has some effect.
14.
Yes, you're right. Distance north does affect temperature. Yet, even
15.
though it is further north, Newfoundland has higher average
temperatures than Montana. What must this mean?
There must be some other factor.
16.
Yes! Right! What could this factor be ?
17.
I don't have any idea.
18.
Why don't you look at your map of North America. Do you see
19.
any differences between Montana and Newfoundland?
Montana is in the centre of the country. Newfoundland is on
20.
the ocean.
Do you suppose that distance from the ocean affects temperature?
21.
I ' m not sure. It would just be a guess.
22.
True! The name for such a guess is an hypothesis. Supposing the
23.
hypothesis were correct, what exactly would you predict?
The further a place is from the ocean, the lower the temperature
24.
will be.
How could you test your hypothesis?
25.
By comparing temperatures of places different distances from the
26.
ocean.
Very good. Let's do that. Suppose we take St Louis, Missouri.
27.
Which would be best to compare, Atlanta, Georgia, or Washington
DC... ?
I would pick Washington.
28.
Why ?
29.
Because it's at the same latitude as St Louis.
30.
Why is that important ?
31.
Well, if Atlanta were warmer, I wouldn't know whether it was
32.
because it was nearer the ocean or further south.
Fio. 1. An instructional dialogue.

268

J.A. SELF

It is instructive to consider the derivation of the opening question. In
Wexler's system, questions are generated after finding items in the network
which match a teacher-specified "skeleton" pattern and then presented in
a random order. In Carbonell's system, the teacher specifies an "agenda",
which in practice consists of one element (e.g. South America). From this,
a sub-context (e.g. Venezuela) is generated, initially at random since there
are no tags, and this process is repeated until the system reaches an "item
of knowledge", which is then asked. However, in Fig. 1, the subsequent
1. (PROG (MT MS X Y Z))
2. (LET F1 FACT (FURTHERINLAND MONTANA NEWFOUNDLAND))
3. (LET F2 FACT (FURTHERNORTH NEWFOUNDLAND MONTANA))
4. (LET T1 INFER (X Y) (COLDER ?X ?Y)
5.
(FACT (FURTHERNORTH ?X ?Y))
(FACT (FURTHERINLAND ?X ?Y)))
6. (LET T2 INFER (X Y Z M1 M2 A B)
7. (CONTRADICTION ?X ?Y ?Z ?M1 ?M2 ?A .9]3)
8.
(DB ?M2)(GOAL (?X ?Y ?Z)(USE ?B))
9.
(DB ?M1) (NOT (GOAL (?X ?Y ?Z) (USE ?A))))
10. (LET S1 INFER (X Y) (COLDER ?X ?Y)
11. (FACT (FURTHERNORTH ?X ?Y)))
12. (DB ?MT)
13. (ASSERT F1 F2 T1 T2)
14. (DB ?MS)
15. (ASSERT F1 F2 S1)
16. (DB ?MT)
17. (GOAL (CONTRADICTION ?X ?V ?Z ?MT ?MS T1 S1)(USE T2))
18. (PRINT IS ?Y ?X THAN ?Z)

FIQ. 2. The first question.
dialogue would suggest that the opening question is not a random one-it is apparently prompted by the belief that it will reveal to the student a
"bug" in his computational procedure for deciding which of two places is
likely to be colder. In particular, the teacher has hypothesized that the
student "knows" that the further north of two places will be the colder, and
has searched his data base for a contradiction to this theorem.
This process could be expressed in the present implementation as in
Fig. 2. We are not concerned here with programming details but a brief

STUDENT MODELS IN CAI

269

explanation is in order. The language may be considered to be a version of
Micro-planner (Sussman et aL, 1972), except that the system maintains any
number of "data bases" of knowledge, rather than just one to represent
the system's knowledge. One therefore speaks in terms of solving a problem
with respect to a particular data base. Here, we have two data bases: MT,
which contains a representation of the teacher's (or teaching program's)
knowledge, and MS, which contains a representation of the student's
(hypothesized) knowledge. The latter is our "student model". As teaching
proceeds, the contents of MT and MS are modified.
Knowledge is considered to be of two kinds: "facts", which are written
as symbolic expressions without variables, and "theorems", which (at least,
as far as Fig. 2 is concerned) are procedures for deducing facts from other
facts. Facts and theorems may be named (lines 2-11) so that they may be
asserted into data bases (lines 12-15)--unnamed facts and theorems may be
asserted directly into only one data base. The theorem named TI (line 4),
for example, expresses the knowledge that "x is colder than y" may be inferred
from the facts "x is further north than y" and "x is further inland than y".
This theorem is asserted into MT (line 13). The above hypothesis concerning
the student's knowledge state is expressed by asserting the theorem S1 into
MS (line 15). Apart from domain-specific procedures such as T1, MT may
also contain procedures representing type (a) knowledge. For example, T2
(line 6) is a procedure for deriving a "contradiction" between two procedures. It assigns values to the variables X, Y, Z* so that the fact (?X ?Y ?Z)
may be proved with respect to (whatever data base has been assigned to)
M2, using (whatever theorem has been assigned to) B, but not with respect
to M1, using A. When called as on line 17, it assigns values such that the
next line prints
IS NEWFOUNDLAND COLDER THAN MONTANA
The GOAL primitive initiates a search or modification of the current data
base (using asserted theorems) to find an instantiation of its pattern argument.
The further primitives INFER and FACT, respectively, inhibit the use of
data base-modifying theorems and the use of any theorems at all. The system
decides which theorems to apply by matching the calling (or "goal") pattern
with the theorem templates [e.g. for T1 the template is (COLDER ?X ?Y)].
Theorems may be applied either to determine whether a particular fact is
true or to assign values to unassigned variables so as to satisfy a calling
* The convention is that a variable is referenced by prefixing a ? and a literal atom is
written explicitly. Thus (USE T2) on line 17 means "use the theorem named T2", and
(USE ?A) on line 9 means "use the theorem whose name has been assigned to the variable A".

270

J.A. SELF

pattern. More complex "goals" may be specified by logical combinations
of these primitives, and achieved by a system backtrack, if required, to find
alternative instantiations for previous GOAL activations.
Regarding the implementation of the system, it is important of course that
it should be possible to handle procedures as data objects, i.e. to create,
modify and evaluate them. For example, to increase generality, the theorem
S1 would not be explicitly defined as in Fig. 2; it would be created by a
simple transformation of T1. Similarly, TI would probably have been derived
from a more complicated version. At each stage, the teaching program
will use a procedure (e.g. T1) slightly more complicated than the student's
analogue (e.g. S1). And, most important, as the student is deemed to learn,
so the contents of MS are changed. For example, by line 24 of Fig. 1, the
system should have deleted S1 from MS and asserted T1 into it. Thus MS
is a dynamic model of the student, since at any instant it represents what the
system thinks the student knows.

Feedback, Task Difficulty and Objectives
The conventional concerns of CAI can be re-expressed in terms of such
a procedural student model.
The evidence suggests (e.g. Tait, Hartley & Anderson, 1973) that the
effectiveness of an instructional program is largely determined by the program's ability to locate the causes of students' errors and to provide feedback
which draws the students' active attention to these causes. An embodiment
of these errors as procedural bugs gives scope for various kinds of feedback
processes. Often, in CAI programs, feedback consists of a "trace", in which
intermediate results are displayed to or asked of the student. This is, of
course, always possible when type (b) knowledge is executed interpretively.
However, such traces ought not, as they invariably are, to be independent
of type (c) knowledge, i.e. the traces should, as far as possible, concentrate
on a student's particular difficulties. The trace should, in other words, be a
function of the difference between corresponding type (b) and type (c)
procedures. Indeed, it may be more illuminating to a student to trace his own
erroneous procedures.
Allied to such tracing feedback is "explanatory feedback", where the
program attempts to explain, in natural language, the procedure it is attempting to teach. With explicit type (b) knowledge, we can avoid entirely prestored explanations (e.g. those of Peplinski), and attempt, as Siklossy
proposes, "to explain to the student the problem-solving behaviour of the
program when its behaviour can be fruitfully imitated by a human." Of

STUDENT MODELS IN CAI

271

course this is one of the more intriguing problems in CAI, being intimately
concerned with the design of high-level problem-oriented programming
languages and with the mechanisms of human problem-solving. Any such
generated explanations should again be functions of type (c) knowledge-when A explains something to B, A should bear in mind what B knows and
what B does not know. The ability to generate procedural explanations is
invaluable to a conversational CAI program; for example, in Fig. 1, sentence 5
may be construed as the teacher "explaining" procedure S1 to the student.
Similarly, st-" race 11 is an explanation of a simple transformation of S1. It is
the function or' type (a) knowledge to decide when to offer such explanations.
Similarly, task difficulty should not be defined only in terms of type (b)
knowledge (as in, e.g. Peplinski, 1970), but also of type (c) knowledge
(as in, e.g. Ayscough, 1973, where success probabilities are calculated from
the values of registers serving as the student model). Here, we would express
"difficulty" in terms of the complexity of the procedures in the student model
which he is required to evaluate, and of the difference between corresponding
teacher and student procedures.
A teaching program's objectives, if they are expressed at all (and they are
not by Carbonell, Wexler, or Brown), are usually specified as threshold
register values. When, as here, we regard teaching as a process of modifying
(a representation of) a student's knowledge base, it is more natural to specify
objectives in terms of the required contents of the student model, and hence
to express type (a) knowledge in terms of "goals" to be achieved, i.e. in the
same goal-oriented problem-solving formalism as for type (b) knowledge.
Good teaching is a high-level intellectual activity requiring high-level
languages for its adequate expression.
The teaching process above may be considered to be activated by a
procedure call of the form (GOAL (?MS KNOWS T1)), where the body of
the corresponding theorem describes the teaching strategy. If one now wants
to impose more global goals, e.g. (GOAL (?MS THINKS SCIENTIFICALLY)), then the teaching programmer is forced to consider how he
would specify procedure bodies to attain such goals. Sentences 20-32 of
Fig. 1 are concerned with one particular procedure call within such a global
goal, that is the conception and subsequent testing of hypotheses. This
requires higher-order knowledge, i.e. knowledge about knowledge. Here, for
example, the student (or MS) has been led to modify S1 temporarily to
($2 INFER (X Y) (COLDER ?X ?Y)
(FACT (EQUALNORTH ?X ?Y))
(FACT (FURTHERINLAND ?X ?V))),

272

J.A. SELF

i.e. to run a procedure expressing the knowledge that a hypothesis relating
two factors may be tested by eliminating the effect of all other factors.
"Teaching goals" may therefore be expressed as non-deterministic procedures just like those used in problem-solving, and student errors may
usefully be considered to initiate "failures", backtracking to remedial
teaching.

A Program
A system has been implemented to provide a means of testing our ideas
about teaching and student modelling, and a program written which attempts
to teach along the lines discussed above. The printout shown in Fig. 3 shows
the present ability of the program, which obviously, at the moment, serves
only demonstration purposes. Of course, the surface appearance of an
individual dialogue is important only in so far as it reflects the underlying
methodology. Hence the attention is directed to the accompanying comments, which indicate how the program is constantly examining, modifying,
evaluating and explaining a student model expressed as a set of procedures
and facts. There are, at the moment, numerous trapdoors down which this
"conversation" is liable to disappear, owing to the non-existence of
any significant natural language analysis or teaching strategy component.
The system runs interactively on the Leeds Modular One multi-access
system (Cole, 1973) and consists of a hierarchy of programming languages.
At the highest level we have a PLANNER-like language (Hewitt, 1972), implemented as an extension of a slightly modified LISP 1.5 (McCarthy,
Abrahams, Edwards, Hart & Levin, 1963) any LISP program may
call a PLANNER function, and vice versa. Since PLANNERis an experimental
language, we have not hesitated to modify functions or to add functions of our own. The LISP/PLANNERsystem runs under an interpreter
written in BCPL (Richards, 1969). All functions which need to be
explicitly available at run-time, to be modified, explained, etc. (e.g. the
contents of the student model), are expressed in LISP/PLANNER,and any
other functions (e.g. those expressing type (a) knowledge) may be written
in LISP/PLANNERor in BCPL. The latter, being compiled, obviously run faster.
There is no implied loss of power, since any LISP/PLANNERprogram may
evaluate a BCPL function, and obviously vice versa. Owing to a hardware
restriction limiting the size of a code segment to 8K, the system runs as a
series of compiled segments, each of which may call other segments as
subroutines. The consequent program overlaying deteriorates run times, and
makes practical use of the system a dubious proposition.

STUDENT MODELS IN CAI

273

IS N E W F O U N D L A N D C O L D E R T H A N M O N T A N A ?
; question generated as described above, after
; deriving a contradiction between teacher model (MT)
; and hypothesized student model (MS)
YES+WHY ?
N E W F O U N D L A N D IS F U R T H E R N O R T H T H A N M O N T A N A + ; linguistic analysis is currently rudimentary
YES. SO, I F YOU T A K E A N Y TWO PLACES, I F T H E F I R S T PLACE IS
F U R T H E R N O R T H T H A N T H E SECOND PLACE T H E N T H E F I R S T
P L A C E IS C O L D E R T H A N THE SECOND P L A C E ?
; student's reply is checked, by examining MT.
; A LISP function generates explanations of
; procedures or LISP functions, under certain
; restrictions. Here, an explanation of S1
; has been embedded in the question. The
; quality of English generated is unsophisticated.
YES+; confirms that MS should indeed contain S1
BUT M O N T A N A IS C O L D E R T H A N N E W F O U N D L A N D
W H A T DOES THAT I M P L Y ?
; system reports contradiction found above
I DON'T KNOW+W O U L D YOU SAY T H A T I F THE F I R S T PLACE IS F U R T H E R SOUTH
T H A N T H E SECOND PLACE T H E N THE F I R S T P L A C E IS C O L D E R T H A N
T H E SECOND PLACE?
; system explains a transformed version of S1
; with N O R T H replaced by its opposite SOUTH.
NO+W O U L D YOU SAY T H A T B E I N G F U R T H E R N O R T H H A S NO E F F E C T ?
; system knows that it has, since F U R T H E R N O R T H
; occurs in T1. Type (a) knowledge should
; determine when to offer such hints.
NO+W H A T O T H E R F A C T O R IS INVOLVED ?
M O N T A N A IS F U R T H E R I N L A N D T H A N N E W F O U N D L A N D + YES. I F THE FIRST PLACE IS F U R T H E R I N L A N D T H A N THE SECOND
P L A C E T H E N THE F I R S T PLACE IS COLDER T H A N THE SECOND PLACE
; another generated explanation--the system
; is at present linguistically incapable of
; accepting student sentences of such complexity.
; System has now modified MS, by modifying
; S1, to represent the student's new
; knowledge state.

FIG. 3. A Program-student dialogue.
(Student responses are terminated with a +-)

274

J.A. SELF

Some Criticisms

This section anticipates and comments upon some criticisms that may be
made about the proposals of previous sections.
(a) The procedures in Fig. 2 are incorrect.
We are not concerned to provide a theory of meteorology, but only to
indicate the advantages of manipulating explicit procedural models. However,
to the extent that teaching requires a deep understanding of what is being
taught, CAI programs will experience difficulties where explicit procedures
cannot be specified.
(b) The program lacks a "natural language component".
Notwithstanding the claim of Taylor (1968) to have provided a "machine
ability to 'follow' a line of argument along several or many alternative
paths", there are considerable linguistic difficulties preventing the attainment
of Fig. 1-type dialogues. Since effective communication demands that the
speaker has a model of the knowledge of the listener (and vice versa), a
procedural student model as here outlined seems a minimum prerequisite.
(c) The determination of program equivalence is a difficult problem.
The comparison of procedures as implied in previous sections does,
indeed, amount to determining program equivalence which is a research
area with barely significant results as yet. But, if this is what teaching involves
----creating within a student procedures comparable to a teacher's--this
difficulty must be acknowledged.
(d) The taxonomy of errors is incomplete.
In the discussion of Fig. 1, the only type of student error considered was
"a conditional missing from a procedure". Clearly, there are other types of
error, e.g. wrong function applied (e.g. confusion over "subset" and "member" in set theory), failure to generalize (i.e. procedure contains a constant
which should be a variable), etc. One of the more interesting developments
would be an attempt to define a taxonomy of errors in terms of a procedural
model [cf. Carbonell's taxonomy, (1970, p. 90), which is clearly oriented
toward "semantic network" analyses].
(e) There is no experimental evidence that a procedural model is a good
descriptive one.
Since alternative models were criticized above on this account, this
is a valid criticism not diminished by the fact that methods used by
programs developed around procedural models (e.g. Winograd, 1972)
are often compared to the corresponding problem-solving methods of

STUDENT MODELS IN CAI

275

humans. Precise psychological evidence is lacking. Even so, this does not
affect the principle that the student model should consist of a set of programs,
but is concerned with details of the programs themselves.

Conclusions
The conclusions to be drawn from this study are threefold:
(a) A "student model" expressed in terms of a set of procedures in a
high-level language is more insightful than most student models as implemented in existing CAI programs, and can lead to more sophisticated
teaching performance, in that the operation of the teaching program can be
made to depend upon an explicit representation of a student's current
knowledge state.
(b) Certain approaches to CAI have been groping towards problems which
are the essence of computer science itself, e.g. the equivalence of programs
and the representation of problem-solving processes (or the design of programming languages), and there may be much to gain by acknowledging a
common interest.
(c) There are considerable theoretical and practical difficulties to be
overcome before CAI can achieve some of the goals that researchers have
set for the field. These difficulties ensure that attempts, such as the above,
to provide more pertinent question generation and feedback comment than
is given by conventional CAI programs will, for some time, not be cost
effective. There is, of course, little evidence that the intuition that more
knowledgeable computer tutors do provide better instruction is a sound
one. Until such programs are implemented there cannot be.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to members of the Computer Based Learning Project, University
of Leeds, for their comments on a draft of this paper, and also to Professor R. C.
Anderson, University of Illinois, for permission to use the dialogue in Fig. 1.

References
AYSCOUGH, P. B. (1973). Computer based learning in the teaching laboratory.
Chemistry in Britain, 9, 61.
BROWN, J. S., BURTON, R. R. & ZDYBEL, F. (1972). A model-driven Question and
Answering system for mixed initiative CAI. Technical Report No. 22, Dept. of
Information and Computer Science, University of California, U.S.A.

276

J.A. SELF

CARBONELL,J. R. (1970). Mixed initiative man-computer instructional dialogues.
(PhD thesis, M/T) Report No. 1971. Cambridge, U.S.A.: Bolt Beranek &
Newman.
COLE,A. J. (1973). An outline description of the Leeds Modular One multi-access
system. Internal report, Computer Based Learning Project, Leeds.
COLES, L. S. (1969). Computer-aided instruction using an inferential questionanswering system with natural language input: a plan for research. Technical
note 11, AI Group, Stanford Res. Inst.
COLLINS,A. M. tY¢QUILLIAN,M. R. (1969). Retrieval time from semantic memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 8, 240.
HEWaTT, C. (1972). Description and theoretical analysis (using schemata) of
Planner. PhD thesis, MIT.
MCCARTHY, J., ABRAHAMS, P. W., EDWARDS, D. J., HART, T. P. & LEVIN, M. 1.
(1963). LISP 1"5 Programmer's Manual. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press.
NORMAN, D. A. (1972). Memory, knowledge and the answering of questions. Centre
for Human Information Processing, Report 25, University of California.
PEPLINSKI, C. (1970). A generative CAI program that teaches algebra. Technical
Report No. 90, Computer Science Department, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, U.S.A.
QUILLIAN,M. R. (1969). The teachable language comprehender. Comm. ACM, 12,
459.
RICHARDS, M. (1969). BCPL Reference Manual. Technical Memorandum 69/1,
Computer Laboratory, Cambridge.
SIKLOSSY, L. (1971). Control and feedback in the environment of a computer
tutor. Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Amer. Soc. Cybernetics.
SUSSMAN,G. J., WINOGRAD,T. & CHARNIAK,E. (1972). Micro-planner Reference
Manual. AI Memo 203A, MIT.
SUSSMAN, G. J. & McDERMOTr, D. V. (1972). Conniver Reference Manual AI
Memo 259, MIT.
TAIT, K., HARTLEY,J. R. & ANDERSON, R. C. (1973). Feedback procedures in
computer-assisted arithmetic instruction. British Journal of Educational
Psychology, 43, 161.
TAYLOR, E. F. (1968). Automated tutoring and its discontents. American Journal of
Physics, 36, 496.
WEXLER, J. D. (1970). A generative, remedial and query system for teaching by
computer. PhD thesis, University of Wisconsin, Madison, U.S.A.
WlNOGRAD, T. (1972). Understanding natural language. New York: Academic Press.

